README.md, before:

# Local AI Copilot for VS Code

A VS Code extension that provides GitHub Copilot-like functionality using locally running Ollama models.

## Features

- 🤖 **Chat Interface** - Interactive AI chat panel similar to GitHub Copilot
- 💻 **Code Generation** - Generate code from natural language descriptions
- ✏️ **Code Editing** - Edit and refactor selected code with AI assistance
- 📝 **Code Explanation** - Understand complex code with detailed explanations
- 🔄 **Diff Preview** - See before/after comparisons before applying changes
- 🎨 **Beautiful UI** - Modern interface that matches VS Code's theme
- 🚀 **Multiple Models** - Choose between different Ollama models

## Prerequisites

1. **Ollama** - Install from [https://ollama.ai](https://ollama.ai)
2. **Python 3.8+** - For the backend server
3. **Node.js 16+** - For building the extension

## Supported Models

This extension is configured for:
- `gemma3:4b` - Fast responses, good for quick tasks
- `gemma3:8b` - Better quality, slightly slower
- `deepseek-r1:8b` - Reasoning model, best for complex tasks

## Installation

### Step 1: Install Ollama Models

```bash
ollama pull gemma3:4b
ollama pull gemma3:8b
ollama pull deepseek-r1:8b
```

### Step 2: Set Up Python Server

```bash
cd server
pip install -r requirements.txt
python server.py
```

The server will start on `http://127.0.0.1:5000`

### Step 3: Build and Install VS Code Extension

```bash
cd vscode-extension
npm install
npm run compile
```

Then press `F5` to launch the extension in a new VS Code window.

## Usage

### Chat Interface

1. Open Command Palette (`Ctrl+Shift+P` or `Cmd+Shift+P`)
2. Type "Local AI Copilot: Chat"
3. Start chatting with your AI!

### Quick Actions

- **Explain Code**: Select code → Right-click → "AI: Explain Code"
- **Edit Code**: Select code → Right-click → "AI: Edit Code"
- **Generate Code**: Place cursor → Right-click → "AI: Generate Code"

### Chat Features

- **Text Responses**: Regular chat messages appear in the chat window
- **Code Responses**: Code suggestions appear with action buttons:
  - **Insert at Cursor**: Add code at current position
  - **Replace Selection**: Replace selected code with AI suggestion
  - **Copy**: Copy code to clipboard

### Model Selection

Choose your preferred model from the dropdown in the chat panel:
- Use smaller models (4b) for faster responses
- Use larger models (8b) for better quality and complex tasks

## How It Works

1. **VS Code Extension**: Provides the UI and integrates with VS Code
2. **Python Server**: Handles communication with Ollama
3. **Ollama**: Runs the AI models locally on your machine

```
VS Code Extension (TypeScript)
       ↓
Python Server (Flask)
       ↓
Ollama API (Port 11434)
       ↓
Local AI Models
```

## Configuration

### Changing Models

Edit `server/server.py` to add or modify models:

```python
MODELS = {
    "model-name": "ollama-model-name",
    # Add more models here
}
```

Edit `vscode-extension/src/webview.html` to update the dropdown:

```html
<option value="model-name">Display Name</option>
```

### Changing Server Port

In `server/server.py`:
```python
app.run(port=5000, debug=True)  # Change port here
```

In `vscode-extension/src/extension.ts`:
```typescript
const SERVER_URL = 'http://127.0.0.1:5000';  // Update port here
```

## Troubleshooting

### Server Won't Start

1. Check if Python dependencies are installed:
   ```bash
   pip install -r server/requirements.txt
   ```

2. Check if port 5000 is available:
   ```bash
   # Windows
   netstat -ano | findstr :5000
   
   # Mac/Linux
   lsof -i :5000
   ```

### Ollama Connection Issues

1. Verify Ollama is running:
   ```bash
   ollama list
   ```

2. Check Ollama API:
   ```bash
   curl http://localhost:11434/api/tags
   ```

3. Test model:
   ```bash
   ollama run gemma3:4b "Hello"
   ```

### Extension Not Working

1. Check server health:
   ```bash
   curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/health
   ```

2. Check browser console in VS Code:
   - Open Command Palette
   - Type "Developer: Toggle Developer Tools"
   - Check for errors

3. Rebuild extension:
   ```bash
   cd vscode-extension
   npm run compile
   ```

## Development

### Project Structure

```
├── server/
│   ├── server.py           # Flask server
│   └── requirements.txt    # Python dependencies
├── vscode-extension/
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── extension.ts    # Main extension code
│   │   ├── webview.html    # Chat UI
│   │   └── webview.js      # Chat logic
│   ├── package.json        # Extension manifest
│   └── tsconfig.json       # TypeScript config
└── README.md
```

### Building for Production

```bash
cd vscode-extension
npm install -g vsce
vsce package
```

This creates a `.vsix` file you can install with:
```bash
code --install-extension local-ai-copilot-*.vsix
```

## Contributing

Feel free to submit issues and pull requests!

## License

MIT License

## Credits

Built with:
- [Ollama](https://ollama.ai) - Local AI models
- [Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/) - Python web framework
- [VS Code Extension API](https://code.visualstudio.com/api) - Extension framework

Commit message:

feat: Enhance context gathering for AI suggestions with project-wide awareness

README.md, after:

# Local AI Copilot for VS Code


A VS Code extension that provides GitHub Copilot-like functionality using locally running Ollama models.

Now with **smart project-wide context**: The extension automatically gathers code and documentation from your workspace for every AI request, making suggestions and edits much more intelligent and Copilot-like.

## Features

- 🤖 **Chat Interface** - Interactive AI chat panel similar to GitHub Copilot
- 💻 **Code Generation** - Generate code from natural language descriptions
- ✏️ **Code Editing** - Edit and refactor selected code with AI assistance
- 📝 **Code Explanation** - Understand complex code with detailed explanations
- 🔄 **Diff Preview** - See before/after comparisons before applying changes
- 🎨 **Beautiful UI** - Modern interface that matches VS Code's theme
- 🚀 **Multiple Models** - Choose between different Ollama models

- 🧠 **Project-Wide Context Awareness** – AI suggestions and edits use key files from your workspace (README, SETUP, main, server, extension, `.py`, `.ts`, `.js`, `.md`).
- 🔍 **Intelligent Suggestions & Edits** – AI can reason about your whole project, not just the current file or cursor.
- 🛠️ **Smart Code Actions** – Insert, replace, and preview code with context-aware suggestions and diff previews.

## Prerequisites

1. **Ollama** - Install from [https://ollama.ai](https://ollama.ai)
2. **Python 3.8+** - For the backend server
3. **Node.js 16+** - For building the extension

## Supported Models

This extension is configured for:
- `gemma3:4b` - Fast responses, good for quick tasks
- `gemma3:8b` - Better quality, slightly slower
- `deepseek-r1:8b` - Reasoning model, best for complex tasks

## Installation

### Step 1: Install Ollama Models

```bash
ollama pull gemma3:4b
ollama pull gemma3:8b
ollama pull deepseek-r1:8b
```

### Step 2: Set Up Python Server

```bash
cd server
pip install -r requirements.txt
python server.py
```

The server will start on `http://127.0.0.1:5000`

### Step 3: Build and Install VS Code Extension

```bash
cd vscode-extension
npm install
npm run compile
```

Then press `F5` to launch the extension in a new VS Code window.

## Usage

### Chat Interface

## Smart Project Context

- The extension automatically gathers context from up to 5 key files in your workspace (README, SETUP, main, server, extension, `.py`, `.ts`, `.js`, `.md`) for every AI request.
- It combines this with the current editor's context and selection.
- The AI will now be able to reason about your whole project, not just the current file or cursor.

This makes code suggestions, edits, and completions much smarter and more Copilot-like!

1. Open Command Palette (`Ctrl+Shift+P` or `Cmd+Shift+P`)
2. Type "Local AI Copilot: Chat"
3. Start chatting with your AI!

### Quick Actions

- **Explain Code**: Select code → Right-click → "AI: Explain Code"
- **Edit Code**: Select code → Right-click → "AI: Edit Code"
- **Generate Code**: Place cursor → Right-click → "AI: Generate Code"

### Chat Features

- **Text Responses**: Regular chat messages appear in the chat window
- **Code Responses**: Code suggestions appear with action buttons:
  - **Insert at Cursor**: Add code at current position
  - **Replace Selection**: Replace selected code with AI suggestion
  - **Copy**: Copy code to clipboard

### Model Selection

Choose your preferred model from the dropdown in the chat panel:
- Use smaller models (4b) for faster responses
- Use larger models (8b) for better quality and complex tasks

## How It Works

1. **VS Code Extension**: Provides the UI and integrates with VS Code
2. **Python Server**: Handles communication with Ollama
3. **Ollama**: Runs the AI models locally on your machine

**Advanced:**

When you ask for code generation, editing, or explanation, the extension:
1. Collects relevant code and documentation from your workspace.
2. Combines it with your current selection or file context.
3. Sends this rich context to the AI backend for smarter, project-aware results.

```
VS Code Extension (TypeScript)
       ↓
Python Server (Flask)
       ↓
Ollama API (Port 11434)
       ↓
Local AI Models
```

## Configuration

### Changing Models

Edit `server/server.py` to add or modify models:

```python
MODELS = {
    "model-name": "ollama-model-name",
    # Add more models here
}
```

Edit `vscode-extension/src/webview.html` to update the dropdown:

```html
<option value="model-name">Display Name</option>
```

### Changing Server Port

In `server/server.py`:
```python
app.run(port=5000, debug=True)  # Change port here
```

In `vscode-extension/src/extension.ts`:
```typescript
const SERVER_URL = 'http://127.0.0.1:5000';  // Update port here
```

## Troubleshooting

### Server Won't Start

1. Check if Python dependencies are installed:
   ```bash
   pip install -r server/requirements.txt
   ```

2. Check if port 5000 is available:
   ```bash
   # Windows
   netstat -ano | findstr :5000
   
   # Mac/Linux
   lsof -i :5000
   ```

### Ollama Connection Issues

1. Verify Ollama is running:
   ```bash
   ollama list
   ```

2. Check Ollama API:
   ```bash
   curl http://localhost:11434/api/tags
   ```

3. Test model:
   ```bash
   ollama run gemma3:4b "Hello"
   ```

### Extension Not Working

1. Check server health:
   ```bash
   curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/health
   ```

2. Check browser console in VS Code:
   - Open Command Palette
   - Type "Developer: Toggle Developer Tools"
   - Check for errors

3. Rebuild extension:
   ```bash
   cd vscode-extension
   npm run compile
   ```

## Development

### Project Structure

```
├── server/
│   ├── server.py           # Flask server
│   └── requirements.txt    # Python dependencies
├── vscode-extension/
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── extension.ts    # Main extension code
│   │   ├── webview.html    # Chat UI
│   │   └── webview.js      # Chat logic
│   ├── package.json        # Extension manifest
│   └── tsconfig.json       # TypeScript config
└── README.md
```

### Building for Production

```bash
cd vscode-extension
npm install -g vsce
vsce package
```

This creates a `.vsix` file you can install with:
```bash
code --install-extension local-ai-copilot-*.vsix
```

## Contributing

Feel free to submit issues and pull requests!

## License

MIT License

## Credits

Built with:
- [Ollama](https://ollama.ai) - Local AI models
- [Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/) - Python web framework
- [VS Code Extension API](https://code.visualstudio.com/api) - Extension framework
